[FEATURE] Document Model and Repository (#6531)
TYPO3-Documentation/TYPO3CMS-Reference-CoreApi: Documentation/ExtensionArchitecture/ExtbaseRewrite/Domain/Model.rst

A domain model is a PHP class that represents one type of data your extension
works with — an event, a product, a blog post, a speaker. Each instance of
the class corresponds to one database record. Extbase maps between the two
automatically.

..  contents:: On this page
    :local:
    :depth: 1

..  _extbase-domain-model-abstract-entity:

AbstractEntity — what you get for free
======================================

Every persisted domain object extends
:php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\DomainObject\AbstractEntity`:

..  code-block:: php
    :caption: EXT:my_extension/Classes/Domain/Model/Conference.php

    use TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\DomainObject\AbstractEntity;

    class Conference extends AbstractEntity
    {
        // your properties here
    }

You do **not** declare :php:`$uid` or :php:`$pid` — they are inherited.
:php:`AbstractEntity` provides:

*   :php:`getUid(): ?int` — returns :php:`null` until the object is persisted
*   :php:`getPid(): ?int` — the page UID the record lives on
*   :php:`setPid(int $pid): void`
*   Dirty-state tracking — Extbase knows which properties changed since the
    object was loaded and only writes those columns on :php:`update()`

..  note::

>     Do not extend :php:`AbstractDomainObject` directly. :php:`AbstractEntity`

Reviewer: Use FQN combined with :php-short:

Author: done

    after construction. Read-only properties need only a getter.
*   Boolean properties follow the :php:`is*()` / :php:`set*()` convention
    (:php:`isPublished()`, not :php:`getPublished()`).

**Column mapping convention:** Extbase maps camelCase property names to
snake_case database columns automatically. The property :php:`$conferenceDate`
maps to the column :sql:`conference_date`. When your table or column names do not
follow this convention, override the mapping in
:file:`Configuration/Extbase/Persistence/Classes.php`; see
:ref:`extbase-domain-model-mapping` for the full syntax.

..  seealso::

    `Private properties silently ignored <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/extbase-appendix-pitfalls-private-properties>`_ — why
    private properties are silently ignored, with the full technical
    explanation.

    Field and table mapping overrides are covered in the mapping reference
    (coming soon) and in `storagePid — when findAll() returns nothing <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/extbase-domain-repository-storagepid>`_.

..  _extbase-domain-model-attributes:

PHP attributes in Extbase domain models
=======================================

> Extbase uses native PHP attributes to control persistence behaviour and

Reviewer: They are attributes defined by Extbase, not native by PHP. 
```suggestion
Extbase uses the native PHP attribute syntax to control persistence behaviour and
```

Author: done

validation.

..  versionchanged:: 14.0

    DocBlock annotation support was removed. See
    :ref:`extbase-upgrading-annotations-to-attributes` for the migration table
    and the available Rector rule.

The four attributes you will use on model properties:

..  confval-menu::
    :name: extbase-orm-attributes
    :display: table
    :type:
    :default:

>     ..  confval:: #[Lazy]

Reviewer: We now have two places where these attributes are explained. should we link them somehow?

Author: they are linked in line 185 with the seealso block. Good enough?

        :name: extbase-attr-lazy
        :type: `\TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Attribute\ORM\Lazy`

>         Defers loading of a related object or :php:`ObjectStorage` until the

Reviewer: Use FQN always, use :php-short: to make them shorter

Author: done

    protected string $slug = '';

    #[Lazy]
    #[Cascade('remove')]
    protected ObjectStorage $comments;

    #[Transient]
    protected ?string $computedLabel = null;

..  warning::

    If you are migrating from an older extension, replace all DocBlock
    annotations (:php:`@Extbase\ORM\Lazy`, :php:`@Extbase\Validate`, etc.)
    with their attribute equivalents. The old syntax causes a silent failure
    in v14 — Extbase will ignore the annotation without an error.

..  seealso::

    `Extbase PHP attributes <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/extbase-appendix-attributes>`_ — all Extbase PHP attributes
    with parameters and usage examples

..  _extbase-domain-model-relations:

Modelling relations in Extbase
==============================

The following example shows a model with both relation types — a 1:1 relation
to a :php:`Location` and a 1:n relation to a collection of :php:`Comment`
objects:

..  literalinclude:: _snippets/_ConferenceWithRelations.php
    :language: php
    :caption: EXT:my_extension/Classes/Domain/Model/Conference.php (with relations)

A few things to note in the example above:

> *   **1:1 relations** are a nullable typed property. When :php:`#[Lazy]` is

Reviewer: It is only 1 to 1 if both directions have a relation to only each other. a nullable typed property does not ensure both directions are unique. 

Also 1:1 usually means that both must exist and can therefore not be nullable. I thinkg we must use different language here

Author: I will add a whole paragraph for the relation types. This is too much right now. Code comment added so it gets not forgotten.

Reviewer: Ack

    :php:`Conference` is deleted, all related :php:`Comment` objects are also
    deleted. A comment has no life outside its event, so this is the right
    choice. Without this attribute, deleting the event leaves orphaned comment
    records in the database. Use cascade remove only when the related objects
    genuinely belong to the parent and have no independent existence.

*   The :php:`addComment()` / :php:`removeComment()` pair uses
    :php:`ObjectStorage::attach()` and :php:`ObjectStorage::detach()`. Do not
    manipulate :php:`$this->comments` directly.

*   The :php:`@var ObjectStorage<Comment>` docblock is required for IDE
    autocompletion and static analysis, even though PHP itself does not enforce
    generic types.

..  seealso::

    `Persistence relations <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/extbase-persistence-relations>`_ — relations, lazy loading,
    and the N+1 query trap.

    `Extbase PHP attributes <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/extbase-appendix-attributes>`_ — all Extbase PHP attributes
    with parameters and usage examples

..  _extbase-domain-model-enums:

Enum properties in Extbase domain models
========================================

PHP 8.1

> `backed enums <https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.enumerations.backed.php>`__

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Backed enum syntax<https://www.php.net/manual/en/language.enumerations.backed.php>`_, introduced with PHP 8.1,
```

Author: done

When a table or column does not match the convention — for example, when you
are mapping to an existing table like :sql:`fe_users` — override the mapping
in :file:`Configuration/Extbase/Persistence/Classes.php`:

..  code-block:: php
    :caption: EXT:my_extension/Configuration/Extbase/Persistence/Classes.php

    // Configuration/Extbase/Persistence/Classes.php
    return [
        \MyVendor\MyExtension\Domain\Model\FrontendUser::class => [
            'tableName' => 'fe_users',
            'properties' => [
                'firstName' => ['fieldName' => 'first_name'],
            ],
        ],
    ];

..  Full mapping reference including class hierarchy and multi-model tables — placement TBD.

..  _extbase-domain-model-db-columns:

Configuring persistence for Extbase models
==========================================

A model class alone is not enough — TYPO3 also needs a
`TCA <https://docs.typo3.org/m/typo3/reference-tca/main/en-us/>`__
(Table Configuration Array) definition for the table. TCA tells TYPO3 what
columns exist, what type they are, and how they behave in the backend. Without
it, neither the backend nor the database analyser knows anything about your
table.

> Since TYPO3 v13, the database analyser can create the actual database columns

Reviewer: Anything that works since TYPO3 13 I would not mention the version at all as it works in all LTS versions now

Author: done

You still need :file:`ext_tables.sql` when you require:

*   Custom column types not covered by TCA (for example :sql:`JSON`, spatial types)
*   Explicit indices beyond the defaults
*   Precise control over column length or collation

..  tip::

    Writing a model class and its TCA by hand in parallel is error-prone and
    repetitive. The `TYPO3 Kickstarter
    <https://packagist.org/packages/friendsoftypo3/kickstarter>`__
    (:composer:`friendsoftypo3/kickstarter`) can generate both together via
    its :bash:`vendor/bin/typo3 make:*` commands. It is the recommended
    starting point when creating new models from scratch.

..  seealso::

    :ref:`extension-configuration-tca` — the :file:`Configuration/TCA/`
    folder in your extension, where TCA files live.

    `TCA reference — column types
    <https://docs.typo3.org/m/typo3/reference-tca/main/en-us/ColumnsConfig/Index.html>`__
    — full list of column types and their auto-creation support.

    :ref:`extension-files-locations` — complete extension file and folder
    structure reference.

..  _extbase-domain-model-value-objects:

Value objects in Extbase domain models
======================================

> In

Reviewer: Should we mention when to use Value objects and when to use backed enums? Extendability, limiting values etc?
